---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Metamorphosis: Unnatural Changes That Take Place in Natural Ways
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2018-10-11
labels:
  - Narative
---

<h1>Metamorphosis: Unnatural Changes That Take Place in Natural Ways</h1>
<p>The quote most attributed to Gandhi, “Be the change you wish to see in the world,” has copious depth when explored to great extents.  At face value the quote illustrates that you must act to achieve environmental change; however, the more I acted on my environment the more I changed internally.  In the end my actions were not permanent, my environment changed for the period of time I wanted them to change, but after I was gone, without me to maintain the change, the transformation was left to decay back to where it was originally with no one to maintain its improvement.  The permanent change was internal to me.  It was how I reflected out into my environment that remained.  In turn, I became the person I wanted to be through influencing change to my surroundings.  Gandhi’s quote “Be the change you wish to see in the world,” is about a person’s internal change and finding their role in the world.</p>
<p>I didn’t perform at my maximum potential in high school because I wasn’t aware of what my maximum potential was, so in 2008 I motivated high school students to exceed beyond their own self-imposed limitations of educational and physical boundaries.  I was motivated by a one sided sibling rivalry so doing better than my brother was just good enough for me.  But as a result, my GPA was low and my self-esteem was lower than it should have been.  I joined the military right after high school because I didn’t have an acceptable GPA to attend university.  I regretted my decisions in high school and didn’t want others to have my same regret.  I volunteered to be the assistant wrestling coach at East Lyme High School in East Lyme, CT.  It was difficult to balance military work, a family, and my duties as a wrestling coach, but I thought it needed to be done.  I started the year off running conditioning sessions in the pre-season.  I had everyone fill out a sheet of paper with the maximum amount of pushups, sit-ups, and squats they can do.  The numbers were overall impressive.  I paired everyone up with someone of equal size and passed out the papers to their partners.  I made everyone do their max number of pushups and see where it was in comparison. After the first group was finished and laying on their bellies, I announced to everyone, “Good job, now we are going to do one hundred more.” The gymnasium fell silent.  Slowly argumentative remarks were made not believing it was possible; I ignored their comments.  “Push up position,” I announced.  Together, an hour later, we completed the extra 100 pushups.  We did it again with the second group, but this time with squats.  By the end of the practice everyone was sore.  I called everyone to the center of the mat after our cooldown and stretch.  I had them shut their eyes and imagine the one thing they want in life that they think is just out of reach.  Go home and write down that one thing and make a checklist on what is needed to be done to work towards achieving it.  Then sign the bottom of the paper and post it somewhere they will be forced to look at it every day.  Each day, each week look for something you can do to checkoff one of the items on the list – make progress.  Anything is achievable if you just continue to work towards it.  I had the wrestlers on academic probation apply the same technique to their grades and I just stayed on top of them for not meeting their deadlines; I assigned them extra conditioning with me for bad quiz grades or not doing homework.  They seemed to respond well and at the end of the year everyone had greater than a 3.0 GPA.  My leadership inspired the wrestlers to try harder, do more, and don’t settle for what they think is doing their best.  I taught the students something I wish was taught to me; don’t try your best, do your best.</p>
<p>Charleston, SC had a weak appreciation for submarine veterans, so I volunteered to educate the public and military about submarine heritage.  It was a rude awakening; I attended the 2011 Submarine Birthday Ball and there were only one-hundred-twelve participants.  The Ballroom catering the event was spacious and able to hold up to five-hundred comfortably.  Even though one-hundred-twelve sounds like a lot, the military and civilian population exceeds 125,000.  I realized there needed to be a liaison between the submarine veterans and the military.  Someone who would educate non-submariners, civilian and military, in the sacrifices and traditions of submarine veterans.  I started a non-profit organization from the ground up; recruiting six submarine sailors to be part of the committee.  It was difficult, we started off with no money and no idea on how to start a non-profit organization; however, I didn’t let any of that stop me.  I used my own money and filed for the EIN and 501.c.3 non-profit business license with the IRS and Secretary of State.  I opened up a bank account, drafted articles of incorporation and bylaws, and purchased the $1,200 worth of food and drinks required to host our first burger bash fundraiser.  We spent hours cooking four-hundred hamburgers, two-hundred hot dogs, and rotated in/out of a dunk tank.  It was a little fun but also exhausting.  We made a $2,000 profit on our first fundraiser.  Using the proceeds my organization drafted pamphlets and flyers to educate the public and military about submarine heritage at every future fundraiser we hosted.  Over the course of four months, we raised $65,000.  We used the money to advertise and organize the 2012 Submarine Birthday Ball where we hold time honored ceremonies remembering the submarines that have been lost since April 11th, 1900.  Remembering the sailors that paid the ultimate sacrifice and remain on eternal patrol.  That year we had an attendance of five-hundred-twenty; more people than the fire code allowed in the ball room.  All because the public and military were aware of submarine history and wanted to learn more about its heritage.</p>
<p>The City of North Charleston had a weak relationship with the US Navy after a string of violent crimes by sailors, so I orchestrated a massive community outreach project for the Navy.  It all started while siting at a bar watching the local news with a friend.  After the segment was complete, comments could be heard discussing how much trouble the military base brings to the area.  The remarks were partially true.  I slept on the thought of community impact and decided to see what projects the local United Way had in que.  I gathered the list of sixty-two projects and brought my plan to the Commander of Joint Base Charleston.  I pitched the idea of improving community relations through base wide volunteer outreach.  The Captain White was impressed with my motivation and designated September 6th, 2013 as Joint Base Charleston’s day for volunteering.  The following week I held a seminar in the gymnasium for all supervisors and instructors on the base. I discussed the issues the Navy was experiencing with the local community and why we needed to act and correct our connection with the City.  By the end of the seminar I had recruited fifty-five project leaders and sat down with each one to assign the projects with expected timeline.  The next step was to generate the $1.2 million required to complete the sixty-two projects.  I immediately turned to local corporations such as Google, Boeing, Cummings, and Santee Cooper Power Company and met with officials to receive the necessary funding.  Two weeks before the event I held a safety briefing for all 2,173 sailors that were participating in the community outreach to ensure everyone was going to be safe with tools and explained the importance of everyone as a command liaison to the community.  The day went off without a hitch and Joint Base Charleston contributed more than 8,692 hours of community service in a single day.  When the sailors completed their work and returned to base I had a bash with food and fair rides waiting on the sailors and a few key City Officials in a gesture of gratitude.  At the end of the night, the Mayor of North Charleston presented the command a plaque for appreciation and designated September 6th as a day in remembrance of Joint Base Charleston’s community contribution.  Finally, after six months of preparation and hard work, the City of North Charleston saw good in the military and appreciated everything the military did for their City; the relationship was repaired.</p>
<p>When I acted to influence change in my environment, I caused an internal transformation that reflected who I wanted myself to become.  I wanted to be the person who does the impossible, to believe in and honor something that believes in and honors me equally, and to solve problems that impact people’s lives for the better.  Most things in life are cyclical, meaning they have their ups and their downs, but I am the person that builds it back up.  I am the person that influences my environment to hopefully change the world for the better and I may fail, but I’ll never stop discovering who I am in the process.  Who do you want to be?</p>
