---
layout: essay
type: essay
title: Compassion by Death - Controversial Details Surrounding Physician Assisted Suicide
# All dates must be YYYY-MM-DD format!
date: 2018-12-05
labels:
  - Arguementative
---

<p>Should physician assisted suicide for terminally ill and suffering patients be legal in Hawaii?  Governor David Ige signed House Bill 2739 into law on April 5th, 2018, making Hawaii the seventh U.S. state to legalize physician assisted suicide for terminally ill patients.  However, this topic wasn’t always a 23-2 Senate vote landslide for our tiny island (Zunin).  In 1998 the Governor appointed a blue-ribbon panel on living and dying with dignity to determine if physician assisted suicide is a right fit for Hawaii; this panel operated in parallel with Oregon’s decision to support their “Death with Dignity Act”.  After careful and thorough deliberation, the panel decided that reasonable alternatives should be explored while discussing challenging issues of compassion through death, suicidal ideations as a mental illness due to depression, and the right to autonomy.  We are going to address the same issues as the 1998 panel with research from Oregon and Hawaii to come to a new conclusion.  Physician assisted suicide should be legal in Hawaii.</p>
<p>There are people who endure tremendous pain and suffering while being diagnosed with a terminal illness, and sometimes it only seems humane to grant compassion through death.  Timothy Quill tells the story of such circumstance for Cynthia.  Quill states, “she had nausea and vomiting that could not be relieved, and her wounds and ostomies had an unpleasant smell that she found inescapable and humiliating.”  It’s easy for us to relate to humiliation on some scale, but few of us can truly comprehend the extreme situation that Cynthia was experiencing.  This is when the topic of death with dignity and the practice of ethics verse compassion becomes difficult.  The Canadian Supreme Court struggled with this dilemma first hand in January 2001 when Robert Latimer was tried for murdering his twelve-year-old daughter, Tracy Latimer, who had cerebral palsy.  However, during a recorded interview with National Affairs, Robert Latimer “spoke bitterly of a justice system which, he says, unfairly and undemocratically has labelled him a murderer just because he wanted to end what he says was the unbearable suffering of a loved child” (Walkom).  Seeing loved ones in agony for long periods of time causes us to question our own morality of whether or not death is the right decision; furthermore, it’s never an easy decision to make.  Ultimately, compassion through death is the strongest justification for physician assisted suicide.</p>
<p>Executive Director of Hawaii Right to Life, Andresen Blom, says “studies have found more than [ninety] percent of those who seek [physician assisted] suicide suffer from a treatable mental illness, usually clinical depression” (Omandam).  On balance, it has also been codified into state law, where danger to self is justification for involuntary mental health treatment (Sullivan).  However, some psychiatrist see suicide as a rational decision by terminally ill patients who are not suffering from depression.  To assist with identifying mental illness versus rational choice, two separate psychiatrists are required to assess a patient’s decision-making capacity for competence to derive valid consent.  The general physician can only prescribe the self-administered medication after both psychiatrists have evaluated the patient as being competent.  This measure is in place to prevent outside influence of family or finances from impacting the patient’s decision.  Darrel Hildebrant was diagnosed with AIDS in 1985.  After watching his partner, Maurice, die an agonizing death from AIDS at home, he made a decision to seek physician assisted suicide in Minnesota.  Hildebrant recalls, “’[Maurice] was six foot two, but he was only sixty pounds when he died.  He had almost constant pain, diarrhea, nausea and spells of dementia.  It was awful’” (qtd. in Wolfe).  Even the hospice nurse admitted to having to restrain herself from smothering Maurice with a pillow to end his suffering (Wolfe).  Hildebrant claims, “’I don’t look on it as suicide… this will be different.  I’m not despondent.  I love life.  But a few weeks or a week before AIDS kills me, I’ll take the drugs with a glass of alcohol to speed the effect and slip away’” (qtd. in Wolfe).  It’s not fair to lump terminally ill patients with suicidal ideations into a label of mentally ill.  They have a unique clarity unlike anyone else not in their position. </p>
<p>Spear heading the campaign to allow physician assisted suicide is the topic of autonomy, the right to control one’s own body.  An advocate for Death with Dignity tells the story of his younger sister, “’[she] suffocated to death from lung cancer[.]  Her death was anything but dignified.  The suffering and humiliation as her organs shut down were inhumane.  [His] dog had a better death only a few months earlier.  [He doesn’t] know if she would have chosen to use the act, but [he] wish she’d had the choice’” (qtd. in Nakaya).  Everyone has a unique threshold for tolerance to pain and psychological distress causing us to make exceptional judgements about if life is worth living or not.  Autonomy is about having the freedom to make those choices.  However, Hawaii’s Right to Life supporters argue that autonomy does not extend to choosing death.  One can argue, what greater purpose is autonomy if not able to choose how to die?  Moreover, terminally ill patients and supporters of physician assisted suicide often relate dignity with autonomy which is where Oregon came up with the title of Death with Dignity Act.  Even the Supreme Court in its Casey decision, defending the right to abortion, also equated dignity with autonomy (Wolfson).  It is considered noble, honorable, and excellent to choose not just how but when to die in today's society.</p>
<p>World-wide, the hospice movement opposes government intrusion into end of life clinical treatment while advancing palliative care for the terminally ill; furthermore, hoping that a suitable alternative to physician assisted suicide will be discovered for each patient (Foley and Hendin).  They argue, many terminally ill patients suffer from pain, are afraid, or are depressed, which motivates their desire for physician assisted suicide because they are not receiving adequate care.  Palliative care specialist David Jeffrey states, “’clinical experience shows that persistent requests for euthanasia or physician assisted suicide are infrequent if there is proper provision of palliative care’” (qtd. in Wolfson).  There should be no doubt in anyone’s mind that comfortable suffering is more tolerable than uncomfortable suffering.  However, the point hospice and palliative care specialists are trying to communicate is that while minimizing suffering, they are fostering the potential for creative living, repairing of relationships, and the discovery or reinforcement of personal values; all while waiting for a potential medical breakthrough that may save the patient’s life (Foley and Hendin).  This is directly addressed by Kathleen Foley, “multiple social, medical, and economic factors include the profound changes in the trajectory of dying as large numbers of patients live with cancer and AIDS for months and years following the diagnosis of an incurable illness” as a contest for limitations in health care resources.  This is the strongest argument against physician assisted suicide because its ploys on short term comfort provided by hospice and palliative care doctors and the unknown developments that the future may or may not hold promise for patients.</p>
<p>Conversely, a two-thousand-ten study conducted by researchers Courtney S. Campbell and Jessica C. Cox revealed that between 1998 and 2009, 88.2 percent of terminally ill patients who used Oregon’s Death with Dignity Law to end their lives were enrolled in hospice care, and conclude, “’terminally ill patients seeking physician assisted death are receiving high-quality palliative care’” (qtd. in Wolfson).  These finding directly oppose Jeffrey’s claim that clinical experience shows that physician assisted suicide is infrequent with proper palliative care.  In fact, even Foley and Hendin’s claim that more and more patients are living for longer terms following prognosis of terminal illness due to advances in social, medical, and economic factors has faults.  Geographically, Hawaii is at a disadvantage due to a shortage of medical doctors, both palliative care and general physicians, and concentration of cancer treatment facilities on Oahu makes it costly and difficult for cancer patients on neighboring islands to access care.  A report published by the Healthcare Association of Hawaii describes, “while health insurance coverage in Hawaii is better than the U.S. in general, there are many other barriers to care that make access to health services a complex issue” (“Low Income Again Tied to Lack of Medical Care”).   While Jeffrey and Foley and Hendin’s claims may hold true for certain geographic locations in the world, they do not hold true for the majority of Hawaii residents.</p>
<p>Hawaii casts a unique shadow compared to the rest of the U.S. which is why physician assisted suicide should be legal in our state.  It’s important to understand and have empathy for terminally ill patients who are suffering.  Hawaii Right to Life advocates may claim physician assisted suicide is a coward’s way to die, but through the stories above and gravity of the situation we can see that it takes incredible courage to make a decision of death.  We need to show compassion, understand that alternative treatments aren’t always available, and respect decisions involving autonomy and death with dignity.  Do you want someone else telling you how to die?</p>
<br />
<h2>Works Cited</h2>
<p>Foley, Kathleen M., Hendin, Herbert. The Case Against Assisted Suicide : For the Right to End-
     of-Life Care, Johns Hopkins University Press, 2003, pp. 294-309. ProQuest Ebook Central, 
     https://ebookcentral.proquest.com/lib/honcclib-ebooks/detail.action?docID=3318108. 
     Accessed 30 Nov. 2018
</p>
<p>"Low Income again Tied to Lack of Medical Care." Honolulu Star - Advertiser, Jul 15, 2013. 
     ProQuest, https://hccproxy.lib.hawaii.edu:2412/docview/1400093941?accountid=66155.
     Accessed 01 Dec. 2018
</p>
<p>Nakaya, Andrea C. “Current Issues: Biomedical Ethics.” Current Issues: Biomedical Ethics, 
     2012. SIRS Issues Researcher, https://sks.sirs.com.  Accessed 17 Nov. 2018
</p>
<p>Omandam, Pat. "Panel Hears both Sides on Euthanasia." Honolulu Star - Bulletin, Jun 24, 1998. 
     ProQuest, https://hccproxy.lib.hawaii.edu:2412/docview/412270001?accountid=66155.
     Accessed 01 Dec. 2018
</p>
<p>Quill, Timothy E. Caring for Patients at the End of Life: Facing an Uncertain Future Together, 
     Oxford University Press USA - OSO, 22 Mar. 2001, pp. 60-62. ProQuest Ebook Central, 
     https://hccproxy.lib.hawaii.edu:2427/lib/honcclib-ebooks/detail.action?docID=3053692. 
     Accessed 24 Nov. 2018
</p>
<p>Sullivan, Mark D, et al. "Should Psychiatrists Serve as Gatekeepers for Physician-
     Assisted...?" Hastings Center Report, 1998, pp. 24-31. SIRS Issues Researcher, 
     https://sks.sirs.com.  Accessed 17 Nov. 2018
</p>
<p>Walkom, Thomas. "'I Don't Think I did any Wrong'." Toronto Star (Toronto, Canada), 18 Jan. 
     2001. SIRS Issues Researcher, https://sks.sirs.com.  Accessed 24 Nov. 2018
</p>
<p>Wolfe, Warren. "Choosing Death: Assisted Suicide--Three Lives, Three Journeys." Star Tribune 
     (Minneapolis, MN), 27 Feb. 1994. SIRS Issues Researcher, https://sks.sirs.com.  
     Accessed 17 Nov. 2018
</p>
<p>Wolfson, Adam. "Killing Off the Dying?" Public Interest (No.131), 1998, pp. 50-70. SIRS Issues 
     Researcher, https://sks.sirs.com.  Accessed 17 Nov. 2018
</p>
<p>Zunin, Ira. "Medically Assisted Death Bill should Not have been Passed." Honolulu Star - 
     Advertiser, Apr 07, 2018. ProQuest, https://hccproxy.lib.hawaii.edu:2412/docview/
     2038240845?accountid=66155.  Accessed 01 Dec. 2018
</p>
